The Project Gutenberg EBook of Reproduction, par les procédés
héliographiques Motteroz, du Carnet de Robespierre trouvé sur lui au moment de son arrestation, by Maximilien Robespierre

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Reproduction, par les procédés héliographiques Motteroz, du Carnet de Robespierre trouvé sur lui au moment de son arrestation

Author: Maximilien Robespierre

Release Date: January 20, 2010 [EBook #31022]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DU CARNET DE ROBESPIERRE ***




Produced by Daniel Fromont




Maximilien Robespierre (1758-1794), _Reproduction, par les procédés
héliographiques Motteroz, du Carnet de Robespierre trouvé sur lui au
moment de son arrestation_




Note: texte établi par les éditions MOTTEROZ


Note: Malgré le titre donné par les éditions Motteroz, le carnet de
Robespierre qu'ils reproduisent d'après l'original conservé aux
Archives nationales, F7 4436, ne peut être celui que Robespierre avait
en sa possession au 9 Thermidor. En effet, le carnet s'arrête au 7
nivôse (27 décembre 1793).




Reproduction,

par les procédés héliographiques Motteroz,

du carnet de Robespierre

trouvé sur lui au moment de son arrestation.




[page 1]


1° Nomination des membres du tribunal révolutionnaire

2° Formation des comités et premièrement du comité des marchés

3° Terminer l'envoi des commissaires à Brest, à Cherbourg et dans les
ports en général

4° Le rapport du décret qui rapporte la loi sur les biens des étrangers

5° Le décret qui ordonne que les émigrés seront jugés par tous les
tribunaux criminels

6° Ordonner aux ministres de donner la liste de leurs commis et de
leurs agens

7° Assurer les secours des veuves et des enfans de défenseurs

8° Ecrire sur [mot illisible]

9° Demander à Laurent ses renseignemens

[Les sermens de Pio (Cette phrase, écrite au crayon léger, manque dans
l'héliographie Motteroz)]

Aff. Particulières :

Gontier

Crachet


[page 2]


Dimanche. Rapp. de J.-B. Lacoste

L'Alsace vendue

Hesse à Orléans, à destituer. Conspiration de la réquisition; disposer
avec précaution de celle des grandes villes, surtout de Paris;
n'emploier avec confiance que celle des campagnes et des pays où le
patriotisme domine?

Tenir l'armée révolutionnaire prête; en rappeller les détachemens à
Paris, pour déjouer la conspiration

La commission de Lyon

Envoier Bo. Montaut; rappeler les autres, excepté Couthon et Maignet

Dentzel, Belin, traîtres à dénoncer enfin

Ajournement indéfini du décret sur le calendrier

Organisation du comité

Rapport sur la Vendée

Démasquer la faction

Bordeaux, Lyon, Toulon

Courriers

Tribunal révolutionnaire

Va mal

Déclarer que la section réquisitionnée n'aura pas l'honneur de servir
la patrie

Avoir deux plans, dont l'un livré par les commis


[page 3]


Organisation du Comité

Entendre tous les jours à heures fixes les ministres, la police, le
commandant, l'accusateur public ou un président du tribunal criminel

Ne recevoir aucun étranger dans le sein du comité, les renvoier aux
ministres ou nommer un commissaire, ou un secrétaire, pour les entendre

Annoncer à l'Assemblée la nouvelle organisation du comité

La taxe du tabac rompt nos relations commerciales avec l'Amérique

Taxer les gros marchands en gros de manière que les débitans puissent
vendre Besoins pressans de l'armée de la Moselle et du Rhin

Jubinal de Lure [Cette phrase au crayon léger n'est pas apparue dans la
phototypie Motteroz]


[page 4]


Ier [mot illisible]

Organisation du comité

Infâme violation des secrets du comité, soit de la part des commis,
soit de la part d'autres personnages

1° Placez-vous dans un local convenable

2° Renouvellez vos commis. Chassez surtout le traître qui siégeroit
dans votre sein

3° Punissez le commis qui vous présenta à signer une lettre dont
l'objet étoit d'engager les détenteurs des pièces de conspiration
relatives à l'ancien régime à les brûler

Casser l'arrêté de la municipalité qui interdit la messe et les vêpres;
il n'en a pas le droit

C'est un moien de trouble

Appeler l'accusateur public

Ordonner que [chaque jour (mot oublié dans l'héliographie Motteroz)] la
municipalité surveillera les prisons, sans pouvoir relaxer personne, et
qu'elle sera responsable de l'évasion des prisonniers

Lui ordonner de tenir la main à l'exécution du décret qui défend aux
prévenus de conspiration toute communication entr'eux ou avec toute
autre personne


[page 5]


Dissolution des f. s. v.

Révocation du décret qui établit partout des tribunaux révolutionnaires

Du décret qui assujettit ceux qui arrêtent à envoyer les procès-verbaux
d'arrestation

Demander que Thomas Payne soit décrété d'accusation pour les intérêts
de l'Amérique autant que de la France

Les pièces de Houchard et autres

Organisation du tribunal révolutionnaire

Rabaut est à Durfort, près de Saint-Jean de Gardonnerk, à quatre lieues
d'Anduse et à huit lieues de Nîmes


[page 6]


Blanval Finances,

Rome

Rafron

Merlin

Jagot

Laloi

Bouquier

Isoré

Gentil du Mont-Blanc

Lombart Lachaux

Forestier

[nom illisible]

Enlard

Dewill

Dumas, chef de brigade du bataillon des Vosges à la Vendée

Rappeler tous les commissaires du Rhin et de la Mozelle

Rappeler les mauvais commissaires aux chevaux, et surtout Toursault

Affaire de Lyon

Tribunal révolutionnaire

Départ de Carnot pour l'armée

Conspiration des [mots illisibles]

Forcer les villes ci-devant rebelles, par la terreur, à retrouver les
armes qu'elles ont cachées


[page 7]


Marchand?

GUERRE

Nord

Le général [nom illisible]

Affaire de [nom illisible]

Départ de Carnot pour Dunkerque

Rhin

Demander à Bouchotte ce qu'il a fait. Armer les meilleurs bataillons de
la réquisition. Inventaire des armes


INTERIEUR Représentans à rappeller. Boursaut, Ferraut, [nom illisible].
Représentans à envoier ailleurs, correspondance avec les représentans

Conspirateurs

Organisation du tribunal

[mots illisibles]

GUERRE

Plan pour le Rhin

Plan pour le Nord

Départ de Carnot

Toulon, la Lozère, la Vendée

Armer les bons bataillons. Désarmer les pays suspects

INTERIEUR

Compléter l'armée révolutionnaire et la purger

Organiser le tribunal révolutionnaire

Surveiller les clubs, emprisonner et punir les contre-révolutionnaires
hypocrites

Réprimer les journalistes imposteurs; répandre de bons écrits

Subsistances, approvisionnemens à l'intérieur, à l'extérieur

Rappel et choix des commissaires


[page 8]


de la Convention

Demander la liste des commissaires du conseil exécutif, purger les
bureaux

Quatre points essentiels du gouvernement:

1° Subsistances et approvisionnemens

2° Guerre

3° Esprit public et conspirations

4° Diplomatie

Tous les jours, il faut se demander dans quelle situation se trouvent
ces quatre choses

Subsistances et approvisionnemens

Ce chapitre se subdivise en deux parties:

1° moiens de connaître, conserver et de répartir celles qui sont dans
l'intérieur

Le second, en faire venir de l'extérieur

GUERRE

Comprend la fabrication des armes et des poudres, leur répartition, les
plans de campagne, les choix des généraux et l'emploi des nouvelles
levées

Esprit public et conspiration

Contient les bons écrits, la répression des rebelles, l'organisation du
tribunal révolutionnaire et toutes les mesures nécessaires pour punir
les conspirateurs. Le tableau de la situation des diverses parties de
la République, la correspondance avec les autorités constituées, avec
les Sociétés populaires,


[page 9]


avec les représentans du peuple

Il faut surtout ici un travail méthodique, dont l'une des bases seroit
le degré de civisme ou d'incivisme des divers départemens


[page 10]


GENERAUX

Dugommier, général de brigade à l'armée d'Italie

Il faut 120 commissaires

2 par chaque armée

2 par deux départemens

Il faut en mettre un fort avec un patriote plus foible

Il faut les renouveler ou les changer assez fréquemment

Il faut à tous une instruction générale

Il faut une correspondance active dirigée par le même principe et
adaptée aux localités

Demander à Jarri son projet d'organisation des courriers et les noms
des courriers sûrs, soit à la guerre, soit au comité de Salut public.

Demander la correspondance de Bordeaux, Boisguion et Girey


[page 11]


Courrier au Rhin. Un nouveau courrier porteur des dépêches à Saint-Just
avec une lettre à celui-ci:

"Comme nous avons quelque inquiétude sur le courrier bavard que vous
nous avez envoié et qui est reparti avec nos dépêches, nous vous
envoions la lettre ci-jointe, par un second courrier, afin qu'elle vous
parvienne plus sûrement. Gardez-vous de l'impatience [et de la défiance
(Ces mots "et de la défiance" ont été barrés après coup par
Robespierre)]; nous sommes pleins de l'énergie et de la sollicitude qui
vous anime, et nous vous seconderons de toutes nos facultés"

Ecrire à Hentz de se rendre à l'année du Nord, pour prévenir la
division entre les généraux

Organisation nécessaire des courriers. Deux venant de Strasbourg ont
été rencontrés voiageant tranquillement en cabriolet

Point de courriers en avant. Désorganisation effraiante des postes

Nommer des inspecteurs patriotes pour les courriers

Tout courrier rapportera au comité un reçu de ses dépêches, il sera
tenu de se présenter au comité au moment de son arrivée

Pyrénées Occidentales

Faire réintégrer Dumas et les autres officiers nommés par le
gouvernement. Rappeller les représentans à leur devoir


[page 12]


Pyrénées Orientales

Exécuter les arrêtés déjà pris

Armes de Bordeaux, de Marseille, de Lyon à distribuer aux meilleures
levées; faire passer ceux du nord au midi, ceux du midi au nord

Le [mot illisible] est une manière de cacher les défauts des armes, les
ouvriers patriotes dénoncent cet abus contre les intrigans

Envoier Dupley près de Calendini

Principale mesure de Salut public

Il sera nécessaire d'envoier dans toute la République un petit nombre
de commissaires forts munis de bonnes instructions et surtout de bons
principes, pour ramener tous les esprits à l'unité et au
républicanisme, seul moien de terminer bientôt la révolution au profit
du peuple

_Les commissaires s'appliqueront surtout à découvrir et à inventorier
les hommes dignes de servir la cause de la liberté_


[page 13]


Pour épurer les comités révolutionnaires, il faut se procurer la liste
de tous ceux qui les composent, leurs noms, qualités et demeures

Il faut celle du comité dit central; il faut connaître surtout les
président et secrétaires de chaque comité et faire un rapport à ce sujet

2° Il faut revoir la liste des meneurs de la contrerévolution dans
chaque pays, indiqués par celles des commissions populaires,
directoires, etc., etc., et sévir contre tous ces hommes

3° II faut poursuivre tous les députés chefs de la conspiration, et les
atteindre à quelque prix que ce soit

Il faut que tous les individus connus soient promptement punis

II faut avoir la liste circonstanciée de tous les prisonniers

Décréter que ceux qui auront donné asile aux conspirateurs, mis hors la
loi, seront punis des mêmes peines


[page 14]


Ecrire à Lalande qu'il envoie les pièces et les notes relatives à
Perrochel

Faire arrêter Fournier

S'assurer si Perrochel est à l'Abbaye; conférer avec le comité de
sûreté générale

Arrêter le chirurgien Le Sibur et les correspondans de Perrochel


[page 15]


Parler à Bouchotte pour un courrier

Parler à Dumont pour Sainte-Foi

Ecrire à Brune pour Girey

Appeller l'accusateur public pour Bernard et pour Perrochel

Liberté de Julien, administrateur des armes

Appeller l'accusateur public pour Lamarlière

Parler sur le rapport du comité de sûreté générale, demander qu'il soit
plus complet

Sauver l'honneur de la Convention et de la Montagne. Distinguer la
nuance entre les chefs de la corruption et les foibles égarés


[page 16]


17 frimaire

GUERRE

Nord

Jourdan et Ernouf suspects par leur inaction et leur correspondance

On annonce une nouvelle tentative sur Dunkerque

Il faut se défier de la contrerévolution religieuse dans ce pays

Dufraisse et l'armée révolutionnaire sont inquiétans

Toulon

Dugommier excite la défiance par la manière dont il s'est conduit avec
le général anglois

La Vendée; tout est à changer

La Moselle

Victoire manquée parce que cette armée, qui a un bon général en chef,
n'a point de généraux de division

INTERIEUR

Troubles religieux à appaiser dans le département de la Somme

Y envoier un représentant sage et patriote

Tribunal révolutionnaire à surveiller, organisation à réformer

Représentans à changer


[page 17]


7 nivôse

Dévoiler la double intrigue

Statuer sur Gérard

Rapport sur le tribunal révolutionnaire

Accusateur public à [mot illisible]

Affaire de Lorient

Panthéon pour le jeune hussard, pour Gasparin et Bayle

Rapport du décret en faveur des femmes des conspirateurs




Reproduction

par les procédés héliographiques

de

Motteroz

3, rue Mignon









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Reproduction, par les procédés
héliographiques Motteroz, du Carnet de Robespierre trouvé sur lui au moment de son arrestation, by Maximilien Robespierre

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DU CARNET DE ROBESPIERRE ***

***** This file should be named 31022-8.txt or 31022-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/0/2/31022/

Produced by Daniel Fromont

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
